A new look at Alpha Centuri. This uh
follows on from Once Around Alpha
Centuri, which is a video that I did, I
think it was about four years ago now.
So, this is uh somewhat updated since
then with the latest news.
So, the constellation of Centurus, the
Centaur is a very large area down in the
southern sky approaching towards the
south celestial pole. You can see the
area marked out with the blue boundary
and taking a bite out of it is Krooks,
the southern cross there. Very prominent
constellation.
Down at the bottom left, indicated by
the little pink arrow, we have Alpha
Centuri, the brightest star, and next to
it, Beta Centuri. Now, we'll look at
Beta in another video, but we're going
to concentrate on Alpha Centuri this
time.
It came to attention of astronomers a
very long time ago in 1689.
It was identified as being a binary star
and it was actually only the second such
binary system to be identified. And
there's a photograph against a
relatively bright blue background in
fact of the two components of this
binary system.
These days, our telescopes are able to
track them, and we can see the diagram
of the orbits as they both orbit around
the common center of mass in fairly
elliptical paths. In 1976,
the separation between them was at its
maximum 22 arcsec, so easy to see. In
2016, it had reached the minimum
separation down to four arcsec. So very
much closer together but still
observable with reasonable astronomical
equipment.
Now in addition to being noted as a
double star in the 1800s people were
starting to track the positions of stars
against the very distant background and
they noticed that Alpha Centuri was
changing its location quite rapidly. a
large proper motion as it's called as it
proceeds on its path around the galaxy
and we proceed on our own the line of
sight to it changes against the
background
and in the 1830s 1832 and 33 astronomer
Henderson was able to use the earth's
orbit around the sun as a baseline the
parallax method and figure out the
distance and he was so surprised with
the large deviation that he got
corresponding to a very nearby
location that uh it didn't immediately
publish. In fact, it took him some 6
years before he had the courage to
follow up and publish the value that he
got which corresponds to about four
light years um and makes this the record
holder. The modern uh data is 4.37 for
the u the main alpha centuri star. By
far the closest star system to the sun.
And in fact we can now track these
things very accurately indeed. And these
are the close approach trajectories of
various stars that are moving relative
to the sun. And it shows that at the
moment where the vertical blue dashed
line is the record holder is currently
the Alpha Centuri system actually in the
form of one of its components which
we'll come on to called Proxima Centuri.
But other stars will swing towards the
sun and away again as their relative
position changes on their paths around
the galaxy. You can see Barnard star
there which is currently in second place
is going to come less than four light
years away. Uh Ross 248 uh Giza 445 and
so forth. Um and so Alpha Centuri will
not always be the nearest star to the
sun. But as I said, this is a multiple
star system. And in 1915, using uh blink
comparator photographic plates, Robert
Inis was able to notice that a faint
star in the constellation of Centurus
was moving from position to position.
And we have a modern animation from 1985
to 2010 there of the star moving against
the background. And he was then able to
use parallax method again using the
earth's orbit as a baseline and measured
the distance as 4.24
light years bringing it to a new record
slightly closer than the Alpha Centuri
system, Alpha Centuri AB, the double
star that had been discovered a couple
of hundred years earlier.
So where are these on the sky? Well,
I've got this lovely photograph of the
sky there with the southern cross crooks
and alpha and beta centuri shining
against the background of the Milky Way
stars there. And in set, you can see the
current four arcsec separation between A
and B. And then slightly offset from
that you can see an inset with Proxima
Centuri which is actually 2° away from
the AB pair. And there was a big
question mark over this. Was it really
part of the same system? Was it anything
to do with them? They seem to be at
roughly the same direction in roughly
the um same part of the sky. But that
two° separation is quite significant.
In fact, I've got another parallax photo
for you here. This time not taken using
the Earth's orbit as the baseline, but a
much longer baseline of 50 Earth orbits,
50 Earth radi, so 50 * 150 million km.
And this was taken using Earth as one
end of the baseline. and the New
Horizons spacecraft out in the Kiper
belt. um well away from the sun now long
gone past Pluto and past Arakov and out
into the outer reaches, but able to
photograph Proxima
on the same date as the Earth and give
us a very accurate uh rendition of the
movement and thereby pin down that
distance very accurately indeed because
uh we got this much longer baseline.
Now, until 2017, it was uncertain as to
whether Proxima was in fact
gravitationally bound to the main Alpha
Centuri AB pair or whether it was merely
passing by. But measurements with the
Gaia spacecraft have shown that Proxima
is in orbit around them. But it's uh
taking over half a million years,
550,000
years to do one orbit shown in the
diagram here with the very bright Alpha
Centuri and the tiny little faint
Proxima down at the bottom right and the
great big long elliptical orbit that
varies from 13,000 AU to 4,300 AU. And
at the moment the uh star proxima is at
appastron which means it's at the far
point from the uh central region. Um
perast astron would be the close
approach in its orbit and but it's at
appastron the most distant point at the
moment.
So we have these three stars a pair
orbiting each other quite closely and a
more distant component in a very very
long orbit.
And physically this is a nice diagram
that shows how to compare them against
the sun. We have the sun on the left,
Alpha Centuri A called Riel Centurus,
the foot of the centaur and Alpha
Centuri B, it's slightly smaller
companion goes by the name Tolyan. This
is because in ancient cultures the
Greeks referred to a as Riel Canourus
the foot of the centaur and Tolyan comes
from the Persian uh scholars and
referred to it as the ostriches. So
completely different constellational
arrangement but uh this is unusual
because we don't usually give the B star
in a multiple system a proper name. We
just refer it as alpha centuri B. But
this was felt to be so important that uh
we they decided to adopt the name Tyman.
And then Proxima Centuri, a little red
dwarf star, much smaller by comparison.
And Proxima meaning nearby. Let's hope
we don't find another nearer one. I'm
pretty sure we won't. You can compare
the sizes of the stars all the way
against larger stars like Sirius, the
hotter, whiter star, down through uh
Alpha Centuri, a Riel Centurus, the sun,
Tyleman, and then some of the smaller
stars there. I've done videos about some
of these, Captain Star, and of course,
Proxima at the bottom there, right at
the extreme end of the red dwarf range
really. um go much smaller and you're
into the failed star territory of brown
dwarfs and giant planets such as
Jupiter. So, a few facts and figures.
Riel Centurus A is a G2 class star, a
yellow dwarf, temperature 5,790,
a little bit hotter, just a few tens of
degrees hotter than our sun, and just
10% more massive. It's that extra mass
that causes it to burn fuel faster to
and increase its radius and be hotter.
And therefore, the total output over the
larger surface area at a higher
temperature comes out to be 150% of that
of the sun. So, this dramatically
shortens the life from around about 10
billion years of the sun down to 6.8 8
billion years before Rajel Kenturus will
run out of fuel. And that's gives it
about 1.8 billion years left because
it's roughly 5 billion years old.
When that happens, it will swell up to
form a red giant and then puff off the
outer layers as a planetary nebula,
leaving behind a small white dwarf star
about half a solar mass.
The sun will do very very similar things
in another 4 and a half to 5,000 million
years.
Tyle man little bit smaller than the sun
90% the mass little bit cooler a few
hundred degrees less and that smaller
surface area and lower temperature leads
to the uh fact that the total output
radiating away from the surface is about
half that of the sun. And so it's going
to live roughly twice as long, 20
billion years. And being around 5
billion years old, it's got plenty of
time left. It's only a quarter of a way
through its life. But it's evolutionary
destiny is very similar. Red giant
planetary nebula, small white dwarf.
Proxima. This is just 12% the mass of
our sun and a 50,000th of the total
solar output. Something like that. Um,
that's going to give it a lifetime of
two trillion years as it gently burns
through the fuel and eventually we think
it will form a helium white dwarf. Of
course, won't be around to see it. And
no red dwarf star of this mass has got
anywhere near reaching the end of its
life. Even if it was formed right at the
very first star of the universe about 13
billion years ago, um it it will have
just got nowhere in terms of consuming
its fuel because of the expected
lifetime 2 trillion years.
Now these stars are all rotating and
it's very interesting to see that the
rotation speeds of the stars seem to get
slower as they are smaller. It is the
big stars that spin faster. Uh, I guess
this is because the angular momentum of
all the material that fell in to make
the star is conserved and you've got a
lot more mass in the larger stars
crammed into a fairly small volume and
the result of that is that the star has
spun up to a higher rotation rate
conserving the angular momentum. So you
can see the numbers there
and those spins lead to magnetic fields
in the conducting plasma of the star.
And this of course leads to magnetic
storms or star spots. Sunspots on the
sun, star spots on the stars. And when
we look at the stars, Rajel Canou a
seems to be asleep. It seems to have
gone into a coma, a deep m minimum as we
would call it because the sun did this
um a few hundred years ago. It ceased to
produce sunspots and became very quiet
for a long period of time. Well, A seems
to have done that since about 2005.
and toy man B that's still magnetically
active still cycling away producing
rashes of sunspots
and doing so on a cycle of 8.2 In 2
years, the sun does the same thing. We
have an 11-year sunspot cycle. We're a
little bit bigger and we spin a bit
faster in just 26 days. So, these
processes all seem to be related and
make sense. Now, I mentioned that the
stars were about 5 billion years old.
It's actually most straightforward to
age stars
in the red dwarf category because they
are fully convective. They're fully
stirred. All the material is stirred
through the core and out to the surface.
This is one reason why they live so long
because they are able to use all their
available fuel for fusion in the core.
And it also means that all the helium
that they started with plus all the
helium that they have made in their life
gets distributed through the star. And
so we are able to look at that and get
one data point that gives us a clue as
to how old the star is. But we also know
that these little stars don't make any
of the heavy elements. They only
manufacture helium. They don't make
carbon or any of the later steps. So any
carbon or oxygen that we see in the
spectrum of the star was there when the
star formed. And that acts as an anchor
point for the signature of just how old
the universe was when the star formed.
That tells us how much helium there
would have been when the star formed as
well. And comparing that with how much
we now see and the power output of the
star, we can constrain the age to a very
uh good value. In fact, four significant
digits here, 4.853
billion years.
It's less difficult to do, sorry, le
less straightforward to do with the
larger stars. the stirring process is
not quite so straightforward and so we
are less certain. Uh Riel Centurus A
also dates at 4.85 billion years. We're
not able to be so accurate with that
one. And for Tyman, an orange star, it's
very tricky and the estimates are
somewhere between five and six billion
years, which seems to be older, but that
might be wrong. And it's possible,
indeed probable, that all three of these
stars were formed at the same time.
Certainly, it seems very plausible that
A and B in their tight orbit were formed
together. But some people have suggested
that actually Proxima is not part of the
same family and has been captured much
more recently, hence its really wide
separation and that very very slow
orbit. Indeed, if it encounters um
gravitationally with another star
system, it's entirely possible that
Proxima will get removed and uh sent on
a completely different future direction.
So, we shouldn't really use the age of
Proxima as the sole guide to the age of
the other three. And it would be
interesting to try and pin that down
some more. But if we look to the future,
the stars will evolve and the larger
they are, the shorter lives they have.
So Rajel Centurus a will swell up to a
red giant first and turn into a white
dwarf and then later in a few billion
years time and maybe 20 billion years,
Tolman will also swell to become a red
giant. Now because the orbits of the two
bring them within 11 astronomical units
the distance of Jupiter more um of the
material from the outer layers of Tyman
becomes at risk of being drawn away by
the gravity of the a white dwarf and
pulled across onto it. And this mass
transfer could reduce the mass of Tyman
in its late stages and increase the mass
of the white dwarf. But if you do the
sums, the white dwarf from
uh Riel Centurus is likely to be about
0.6 six solar masses and there just
isn't enough mass in Tyleman
to add to that to take the whole total
over the Chandra Seca limit the limit at
which a white dwarf star would explode
creating a type 1A supernova. So, this
mass transfer may well strip down and
boost the white dwarf, but it's not
going to uh result in a giant solar
explosion.
I'm not sure that we'd be worried if
it's in 15 billion years time anyway.
So, the question then is, do these near
neighbor stars of ours have planets? And
the answer is yes. Because in 2016 we
discovered Proxima B lowercase B for the
first discovered planet and don't know
what happened to A but uh they don't
start from a lower case for some reason.
And this turned out to be very
Earthlike. It's about the same size and
mass, maybe a little larger and a little
heavier than the Earth. And in a very
tight orbit, 0.05 05 astronomical units.
So that's uh very much closer even than
Mercury is to the sun. The orbit just
takes 11.2 days.
But at that distance, given the low
power output of the uh red dwarf star,
you're going to get a reasonable amount
of heat arriving. And we'll talk about
that in a moment.
3 years later, Proxima C was discovered
in a wider orbit, a Mars-like orbit at
1.5 astronomical units, taking 5.2 years
to go around. The longer period is
because the central star is of lower
mass and we can apply Kepler's laws of
planetary motion to work out and and be
very precise about the orbits and get
very precise measurements of the masses
of the central star using that method.
And then also in 2019, Proxima D was
discovered as an inner planet orbiting
around in just 5.15 days. And this is a
a low mass planet, just uh 29 of the
Earth's mass. So very low weight indeed.
Um a small Mercury-like planet, but uh
closer in by some significant margin.
So if we then just uh look in detail at
Proxima B discovered 2016 August by the
radial velocity method where you don't
look for the planet but you look for the
radial Doppler shift of the light from
the star getting bluer and redder
alternately as the star wobbles back and
forth pulled towards and away by the
rotation of the planet around it pulling
in different directions. So, it
oscillates as the planet goes round. And
the oscillation period, well, that's the
orbital period of the planet. And from
the size of the oscillation, we can work
out things to do with how much mass the
planet probably has.
And we get an answer. But it's a little
tricky because we haven't seen the
planet and we don't know whether it's
orbiting in a plane that we are looking
at edge on or much nearer face on. If it
was perfectly face on, we wouldn't see
the effect at all. But the more face on
it is, the higher the mass would have to
be to cause the same line of sight
deflection of the Doppler shift from our
point of view. Now, at the distance that
this seems to be of 0.05 05 astronomical
units from this relatively cool star. We
can use maths and calculate how much
heat is going to arrive and what that's
going to do to the temperature. And it
seems to bring the temperature up to
-39°
C baseline. Now that baseline is without
any greenhouse effect and in fact if the
earth had no atmosphere at all then its
baseline would be minus20.
So we would be frozen up solid. It's the
atmosphere that brings it up from
minus20 to a much more tolerable plus
20. And uh that extra 40° is very
helpful. What we don't need is for that
to become 50. And so if Proxima B has an
atmosphere as well,
well then it would be able to bring it
up from -40° - 39 up to perhaps a
livable temperature. And if the planet
is a little bit bigger than the Earth
and has slightly stronger gravity, maybe
it could do that.
There is the issue that it's probably
tidily locked in the same way that the
moon keeps one face to the earth due to
the effect of the tidal forces.
Maybe Proxima is so close to its star
that it too would become tidily locked.
And it would be very very interesting to
be able to understand its rotation
period on its axis rather than just the
orbital period as well and try and
understand that. Um and that's ongoing
work at the moment.
Being so close to these red dwarf stars
is not necessarily an advantage. There
can be some very strong solar winds and
flares. And we also suspect that Proxima
may get blasted by X-rays from its star
about 400 times more intense than uh the
Earth suffers from. So this habitability
some people question. Just in terms of a
size comparison,
we've got the sun so big it won't fit on
the screen. at the bottom right, the
little Proxima Centuri red dwarf star,
Jupiter and Saturn for comparison, and
Proxima and the Earth. And so we we're
saying really that Proxima is pretty
much the same size as the Earth. We're
fairly sure about the mass and we have
some idea therefore about what it might
be made of and its likely density and
size and so forth. But these are not
precise measurements yet.
But the problem, as I said, with being
too close to your star, especially a red
dwarf star, is that red dwarf stars can
be rather rowdy during their first
couple of hundred million years. They
still end up giving off quite a lot of
solar flares and so forth, but actually
during the first 200 million years, they
are very active indeed. And that would
increase the thermal and radiation
output and move the habitable zone where
water might exist out beyond where
Proxima is because today it's right slap
in the perfect position uh to be able to
have an atmospheric greenhouse effect to
bring it up to a livable liquid water
condition, but only if it's got some
water left. And the problem is that if
the star was too violent to begin with,
it may have fried it to a crisp.
So, I'm not sure if I really sign up to
this theory because with the Earth, the
Earth was formed out of accreting a lot
of material together. And to begin with,
certainly for 200 million years of its
existence, it would have been a lava
ball. It would have had such enormous
amounts of heat from radioactive
materials and from the kinetic energy of
bombardment that the surface would be
several hundred degrees in temperature
and too hot for liquid water. Um any
water would have been boiled away and
might have been in a very steamy
envelope around the planet or might have
been lost completely.
And the theory goes that it was only
after the earth had cooled down several
hundred million years on that comets and
asteroids brought more water to the
earth and delivered all of the oceans
that we see today.
So, the idea that um the stellar winds
could have blown away all of the
volatile materials
during those early times on Proxima. I'm
not sure it really matters because it
would have been so hot on the surface
with all that uh molten rock everywhere
and lava that um the uh volatile
materials would have been up in the
atmosphere or indeed lost and had to be
replaced. So I'm not sure. Now the other
thing is if the planet is a little bit
more massive than the Earth, it would
hang on to those gases in its atmosphere
better. If it had a spin and a magnetic
field from an iron core, it could
protect itself from a lot of the solar
wind as our planet currently does. So
there are arguments to and fro on both
sides. But the recent news is that
measurements seem to be pointing towards
water being present. Indeed, some
suggestions are of a global ocean, so a
water world. And there have even been
suggestions that they've observed lights
on the night side of Proxima B. Are
those lights artificial lights? Are
they, I don't know, some chemical
process? uh glowing volcanoes.
We're not sure. Watch this space. As
soon as we find out definite answer to
that, we'll come back with another
update.
So, moving on beyond Proxima B, we have
Proxima C, the second planet to be
discovered, and that was in 2020,
a super Earth planet, seven Earth
masses,
an orbit of 5.2 years. But at that uh
orbital period and the corresponding
distance from the red dwarf Proxima
Centuri, the temperature is going to be
-234°
C. So that's the equivalent to the
temperature on the surface of Pluto. Um
this is very cold indeed and not a
habitable world at all. Now, it's been
directly imaged and the inset down at
the bottom there shows a little tiny
point of light with a blue ring added
around it that they say is Proxima C.
I'm not quite sure how they identify
that as being significant compared to
all the other dots in the photograph,
but uh I'm assured that that is correct.
Um, and it's sufficiently bright that
there is some evidence that it has a
ring system. Now that's disputed and in
fact the whole existence of Proxima C
has been called into question recently
and this is a a problem that seems to
happen with a lot of exoplanet
discoveries that we find that there are
pulsations and rotations of the star
itself that mimic the effect of the
radial velocity wobble of various
periods of planets. So, um, we're still
in some debate on this one.
Slightly more certain is the third one,
Proxima D, an inner planet in this
Mercury-like orbit, a third the mass of
the Earth, just whizzing around every 5
days. So, um, interior to Proxima B. And
it should be a lowercase D. I'm sorry,
that's an uppercase D on the screen
there. Lowerase letters for planets,
uppercase letters for stellar
components.
Anyway,
right on the inner edge of the habitable
zone. And here's a plan showing B, C,
and D
orbiting around Proxima. And uh you can
see that B and D are very close in and
the disputed Proxima C in a much wider
orbit.
What has been discovered and imaged on
the right hand side here is a dust disc
rather like the Kiper belt. It's uh
between two and four astronomical units
out from Proxima. So well outside
Proxima's habitable zone. And this could
be the realm of a lot of uh comets and
uh ice worlds all forming another Kiper
belt as well as a lot of dust. Or it
could be just dust left over from the
whole star and planet formation period.
But what about the other two stars? What
about planets for Alpha Century A and B?
Well, they orbit each other quite
closely, just 11 AU apart, and that's uh
well inside the size of the solar
system. So you would have two stars
whizzing around each other in the realm
where you might want to put your planets
and that's probably bad. But you can
calculate spheres of influence,
so-called hill spheres, or around each
of the two stars where their gravity is
dominant and the gravity of their more
distant neighbor is irrelevant. And this
leads to there being some stable orbits.
You either have to be close to the A
star or close to the B star inside a
couple of AU. So inside the sort of size
of the inner solar system. But that's
fine because if we're interested in
Earthlike planets orbiting around u
Alpha Centuri A, you would want to be at
about 1 and a half astronomical units.
And maybe if you were orbiting around B,
you would want to be closer in. And
that's shown in the green zones, the
Goldilocks zone, the habitable zone
around the star. Here we have it
illustrated um slightly more
technically. So Alpha Centuri A, you
want to be in that 8 to 2.4 AU band and
possibly where the dotted line is.
Um and then
for Alpha Centuri B a corresponding
slightly smaller green zone. So
definitely possible to put planets in
those zones. Now, we haven't found any
yet. Although, in 2021, it's possible
that we found a super Neptune orbiting
around star A at 1.1 AU in a 360 day
long orbit. Very, very Earthlike
parameters, just slightly further from a
slightly hotter fire and taking a year
to go round. um and
constraints on the mass here. Um alpha
centuri
AB or candidate 1 as it's called C1.
Well, we're not certain, but round about
somewhere between 9 and 35 Earth masses
and 3 to 7 Earth radi. So, pinning this
one down would certainly be very
helpful. and in fact searches um being
undertaken with James Webb uh space
telescope to try and pin this down. It's
a great instrument for that for finding
these planets. Its infrared capability
comes in extremely useful.
Now
to man well this is perhaps an even
better candidate but we haven't found
any at all yet. Um there was one
announced in 2012, Alpha Centuri BB
and um this again was determined to be
an artifact of the data analysis. So is
there one? Well, 2013 another possible
transit event this time was observed
with a planet just 92% of that of the
Earth in a 12-day long orbit. though
that would be extremely hot indeed. And
if that transit is repeated enough
times, we'll be able to hone in on that
and figure out whether there is such a
planet. Um but uh again, it's a bit too
close.
Now again, both of these seem to have
dust discs, kiper belts, asteroid belts
around them.
For star A, it's just outside the
habitable zone at 2.8. And likewise B,
it's at 2 AU. So rather like our
asteroid belt, just out beyond Mars
really. Um, in fact, 2.8 AU is the orbit
of series in the solar system. So this
is very much like an asteroid belt. Um
but it seems to have a lot more of the
dust left over 10 to 100 times more dust
than we have in our solar system.
So if we take that idea of the hill
sphere, the sphere of gravitational
dominance around a body and we have a
think about the sun and the alpha
centuri system as a whole separated by
that 4.24 24 light years between the sun
and Proxima
and we work out the values that we get
for RH the hill sphere. We can plug in
the numbers and you have to take one uh
a third of RH the the radius is equal to
um the
distance between them divided by 3
multiplied by the cube root of the mass
ratio.
That's the formula. And plugging the
numbers in for the earth that means
anything within 0.76
light years of earth is or in fact the
sun sorry is dominated by the sun in
terms of gravity. So 0.76 light years is
the radius of the sun's dominance.
Do that for the alpha centuri system. We
have to add up all the masses of all
three. So 2.1 for
the total made of 1.1.9
and 0.1. Add those together and plug
that into the formula and we get a ratio
coming through at 1.59.
So if you're within 3/4 of a lightyear
of the sun, the sun wins. If you're
within 1.6 six light years of Alpha
Centuri. Alpha Centuri dominates your
gravitational destiny. And if you're
somewhere in between, well then there's
no clear winner. And so objects in that
gap could well go either way. And I've
seen a recent study that has shown that
there are a tremendous amount of small
tens of kilometers sized icy bodies
floating around in that area. Better
watch out if you're planning to take a
trip to Alpha Centuri. There's a lot of
things to hit and traveling at half the
speed of light. That would hurt. And so
really just just a little local map with
the sun in the middle, Alpha Centuri and
Proxima there just over four light
years. Barnard star at six and then a
couple of groups of brown dwarfs in fact
come next just over six light years
away. Um and we have the u cloud in the
middle and that corresponds roughly to
the size of the hill sphere that 3/4 of
a a lightyear gravitational dominance by
the sun. Anything in there is really in
orbit around the sun. Go any further
then actually the uh gravity of Alpha
Centuri starts to become comparable. So
if you're in that intermediate gap
between uh round about the two lightyear
mark, it's uh not clear that you would
follow the sun around in orbit at all.
So we have this neighboring star system
right next door with a family of planets
around Proxima and possibly planets in
the other systems as well.
We've seen that there's probably a
liquid water ocean there and even that
there might be lights coming from the
night side. I'm fascinated to know if
that uh gets to be confirmed
and we received a radio signal. The
parks telescope in Australia was looking
at flares on Proxima and hitching a ride
on the side of it was the breakthrough
listen project taking a feed of the
radio signals and analyzing them. Now
the aim of the project is to look at a
million stars across a wide range of
frequencies. Uh but back in December of
2020, it was announced that they had
found one signal, having sifted through
millions of candidates and thrown them
all away. There was one left, BLC1,
breakthrough listen candidate one, and
it seemed to be coming from Proxima.
They had originally determined that it
was not an earthbound signal, that it
was not a natural signal because it had
a very narrow frequency range, 982.002
megahertz, very precise indeed. There
was a rising pitch Doppler to it
suggesting it was accelerating towards
us. There was no modulation, no message
encoded in it. So what was this? a
beacon, a dial tone, a carrier, and it
lasted for 3 hours and then stopped.
Well, we still haven't got to the bottom
of this. There has been a paper
published that suggests that 982
megahertz might well correspond to a
Japanese mobile phone and that somebody
might have been driving in the direction
of the uh
observatory and that that had got into
the equipment.
There were thousands and thousands, in
fact millions of signals that were
detected in the equipment and eliminated
as false positives because they used an
off-axis detector pointing in a
different direction. And if that too
picks up the same signal, then your
signal is from somewhere nearby on Earth
and is interference. And this signal
there was no detection in the offaxis.
So we don't know. And uh unfortunately
it hasn't repeated despite many listens.
So this may have been a one-off. It may
have been radio frequency interference.
But uh we live in hope that one day
we'll be able to answer some of these
questions. And here is a just a nice
little rendition of what the sky would
look like if you were standing in an
observatory
on the dark side of Proxima B
looking up at the night sky back towards
the sun in the top right Sirius Bettle
and some of the familiar stars of Orion
but some changes because of your
slightly different aspect.
So that's the latest that we have on our
nearest neighbor and we seem to be
homing in on the answers tantalizingly
close to some of these things. But
thanks very much for listening and I'll
leave it there for now and come back
when there's any more new news.